UNR 1601
Climate Change and Water Management
Ch [02] –Climate Change
Dr. Ayman Mohamed Hamza
Construction & Building Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering and Technology, 
AASTMT, Cairo Campus
Arab Academy for Science, Technology, and Maritime Transport (AASTMT) 
Cairo Campus
College of Computing and Information
Climate Variability
•Climate variability refers tovariations inthe mean state and
other statistics (such astheoccurrence ofextremes, etc.)ofthe
climate onalltemporal and spatial scales beyond that of
individual weather events .
•Variability may bedue to
(internal variability ):natural internal processes within theclimate
system
orto(external variability ):variations innatural oranthropogenic
external forcing
2What is climate change?
•Climate change is
achange inthepattern ofweather ,
and related changes inoceans, land
surfaces and icesheets, that have come to
define Earth’slocal, regional and global
climates and occurring over time scales of
decades orlonger .
3
Energy Balance
The temperature ofthe Earth isdetermined byabalance ofthe energy
entering the Earth–atmosphere system and the energy leaving the
system .
Global energy balance (GEB):
Earth's stored energy =
Energy the earth receives from the Sun -Energy the earth 
releases to space .
4
The greenhouse effect
Greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere, including water
vapour ,carbon dioxide ,methane ,
and nitrous oxide ,absorb heat
energy and emit itinalldirections
(including downwards), keeping
Earth’s surface and lower
atmosphere warm .
Adding more greenhouse gases to
the atmosphere enhances the
effect, making Earth’ssurface and
lower atmosphere even warmer .
5
Climate Forcing
•Any process oractivity that influences theGEP either by
increasing ordecreasing theearth’sstored energy contributes
toclimate change andisqualified tobecalled aclimate forcing
process .
6•Climate forcing asanimbalance
inenergy atthetopoftheEarth's
atmosphere either externally or
byhuman activities .
Climate Forcing
Climate forcing processes are classified as:
•Internal Climate Forcing Processes -processes
operating ontheGEB from within theearth .
•External Climate Forcing Processes -processes
operating ontheGEB from outside theearth .
7
Climate Change
Climate 
Change
Anthropogenic 
causes Natural cause You can edit this text
EarthYou can edit this text
Global temperatureThe internal and external climate forcing processes except theman-made
processes aregrouped together asnatural causes ofclimate change .
8External Climate Forcing Processes
1-Variations in the amount of energy received from the sun .
2-Variations in the earth’s orbit around the sun .
9
Internal Climate Forcing Processes
1. Oceans
2. Continental Drift
3. Atmosphere
4. Water Cycle
5. Clouds
6. Ice and Snow
7. Land Surfaces
8. V olcanic Eruptions
9. Human Causes
10Internal Climate Forcing Processes
1. Oceans
•Oceans are the key source of moisture in the air through interactions with 
the atmosphere. 
•Oceans also store heat efficiently , transporting it thousands of miles thus 
redistributing heat in time and space . 
•The oceans and marine life also consume huge amounts of carbon dioxide . 
These ocean -based processes exert tremendous influence on global climate 
and accounts for the variations.
11
Internal Climate Forcing Processes
2. Continental Drift
Scientists believe thatourearth isstillslowly drifting andconstantly changing .
This constant drifting isbelieve tohave impact ontheclimate because itchanges
thephysical features ofthelandmass ,their position andtheposition ofwater
bodies .
The separation ofthelandmasses changed theflow ofocean currents and
winds, which affects theclimate .
12
Internal Climate Forcing Processes
3. Atmosphere
•Theatmosphere stores alotofheat orenergy which comes from thesun.This
energy regulates theearth's climate .
•Theatmosphere composes ofsmall particles and several gases outofwhich are
thegreen house gases (GHGs) thatstore heat.The small particles (aerosols)
tend toblock sunlight reaching theearth .
4. Water Cycle
•Higher air temperatures can increase water evaporation and melting of ice .
•Water vapour is the most potent greenhouse gas .
•Clouds also affect evaporation, creating a cooling effect .
13Internal Climate Forcing Processes
5. Clouds
•Clouds reflect solar energy (cooling the earth) and thereby trapping heat 
being radiated up from the surface (warming the earth). 
•Clouds variability contribute to climate change.
6. Ice and Snow
•The whiteness of ice and snow reflects heat out , cooling the planet. 
•When ice melts into the sea , this drives heat from the ocean causing 
variability in climate .
14Internal Climate Forcing Processes
7. Land Surfaces
•Mountain ranges can block clouds , creating "dry" shadows downwind.
•Sloping land allows more water runoff , leaving the land and air drier. 
•A tropical forest will soak up carbon dioxide , but once cleared for cattle 
ranching, the same land becomes a source of methane, a greenhouse gas.
8. Volcanic Eruptions
•Avolcanic eruption emits large volumes ofsulphur dioxide (SO2),water
vapour ,dust, andashintotheatmosphere thatinfluence climatic patterns for
years .The gases anddust particles partially block theincoming rays ofthe
sun, leading tocooling .
15
This is a sample text. 
Insert your desired text 
here. Greenhouse gasesThis is a sample text. Insert 
your desired text here. Air pollution
This is a sample text. Insert 
your desired text here. DeforestationCoal mining
Industrial processesInternal Climate Forcing Processes
9. Anthropogenic or human causes
16Main indicators of climate change ( 10 )
17
Evidence of Climate Change
Climate records show a warming trend .
18
•Earth’sglobal average surface
temperature hasrisen ,asshown
inthis plot ofcombined land and
ocean measurements from 1850 to
2019 derived from three
independent analyses of the
available data sets.
•The temperature changes are 
relative to the global average 
surface temperature, averaged 
from 1961−1990 .Evidence of Climate Change
Climate records show a warming trend.
19The climate system varies naturally from year toyear and from decade todecade .Tomake reliable
inferences about human -induced climate change, multi -decadal and longer records are typically used .
Calculating a“running average”over these longer timescales allows one tomore easily seelong -term trends .
Fortheglobal average temperature fortheperiod 1850 -2019 (using thedata from theUKMet Office Hadley
Centre relative tothe 1961 -90average) the plots show (top) the average and range ofuncertainty for
annually averaged data ;(2ndplot) theannual average temperature forthetenyears centred onany given
date ;(3rdplot) theequivalent picture for30-year ;and (4thplot) the60-year averages .
Evidence of Climate Change
•This warming isnot caused by
theincrease insolar irradiance .
20Evidence of Climate Change
21
Additional evidence of a warming trend can be 
found in the dramatic decrease in the extent of 
Arctic sea ice at its summer minimum (which 
occurs in September), the decrease in June 
snow cover in the Northern Hemisphere.Evidence of Climate Change
Observations show that theglobal average sealevel hasrisen byabout 16cm
since thelate 19thcentury .
•Sea level isrising faster inrecent decades ;measurements from tide gauges (blue)
and satellites (red) indicate that thebest estimate fortheaverage sealevel rise over
thelastdecade iscentred on3.6mm peryear.
22
•The shaded area represents the sea
level uncertainty, which has
decreased asthe number ofgauge
sites used incalculating the global
averages and the number ofdata
points have increasedEvidence of Climate Change
23
•Measurements ofatmospheric CO2since
1958 from the Mauna Loa Observatory in
Hawaii (black) and from theSouth Pole (red)
show asteady annual increase in
atmospheric CO2concentration .
•The measurements are made atremote
places likethese because they arenotgreatly
influenced bylocal processes, sotherefore
they are representative ofthe background
atmosphere .
•The small up-and-down saw-tooth pattern
reflects seasonal changes inthe release and
uptake ofCO2byplants .Evidence of Climate Change
24Ocean Acidification
AsCO2intheairhasincreased ,
there has been anincrease in
theCO2content ofthesurface
ocean (upper box),and a
decrease inthe seawater pH
(lower box).
Evidence of Climate Change
Paleoclimatology data from natural sources like ice cores , tree rings , 
corals , ocean and lake sediments that have enabled scientists to extend 
the earth ’s climatic records back millions of years . 
25
Evidence of Climate Change
26
Consequences of climate change
Changes in
•Glaciers and ice sheets
•Sea level change
•Sea ice
•Heavy rainfall across the globe
•Extreme Drought
•Decline in Crop productivity
•Changes in ecosystems
•Hurricanes
•Rise in temperature
•Acidification of seawater
2728
Thank You !